The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kiltartan Poetry Book, by Lady Gregory

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The Kiltartan Poetry Book

Author: Lady Gregory

Release Date: October, 2004  [EBook #6656]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on January 10, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE KILTARTAN POETRY BOOK ***




David Starner, Curtis A. Weyant, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.



THE KILTARTAN POETRY BOOK

PROSE TRANSLATIONS FROM THE IRISH

BY LADY GREGORY




_Introduction_



I


If in my childhood I had been asked to give the name of an Irish poem,
I should certainly have said "Let Erin remember the days of old," or
"Rich and rare were the gems she wore"; for although among the
ornamental books that lay on the round drawingroom table, the only
one of Moore's was _Lalla Rookh_, some guest would now and then
sing one of his melodies at the piano; and I can remember vexing or
trying to vex my governess by triumphant mention of Malachi's collar
of gold, she no doubt as well as I believing the "proud invader" it
was torn from to have been, like herself, an English one. A little
later I came to know other verses, ballads  nearer to the tradition
of the country than Moore's faint sentiment. For a romantic love of
country had awakened in me, perhaps through the wide beauty of my home,
from whose hillsides  I could see the mountain of Burren and Iar Connacht,
and at sunset the silver western sea; or it maybe through the half
revealed sympathy of my old nurse for the rebels whose cheering she
remembered when the French landed at Killala in '98; or perhaps but
through the natural  breaking of a younger child of the house from
the conservatism of her elders. So when we were taken sometimes as
a treat the five mile drive to our market town, Loughrea, I would,
on tiptoe at the counter, hold up the six pence earned by saying without
a mistake my Bible lesson on the Sunday, and the old stationer, looking
down through his spectacles would give me what I wanted saying that
I was his best customer for Fenian books; and one of my sisters, rather
doubtfully consenting to my choice of _The Spirit of the Nation_
for a birthday present, qualified the gift by copying into it "Patriotism
is the last refuge of a scoundrel." I have some of them by me yet,
the little books in gay paper or in green cloth, and some verses in
them seem to me no less moving than in those early days, such as Davis's
lament.

  We thought you would not die, we were sure you would not go
  And leave us in our utmost need to Cromwell's cruel blow;
  Sheep without a shepherd when the snow shuts out the sky,
  O why did you leave us Owen? Why did you die?

And if some others are little more than a catalogue, unmusical, as:--

  Now to begin to name them I'll continue in a direct line,
  There's John Mitchell, Thomas Francis Meagher and also William Smith 
    O'Brien;
  John Martin and O'Donoghue, Erin sorely feels their loss,
  And to complete their number I will include O'Donovan Ross--

yet there is in them a certain dignity, an intensity  born of
continuity of purpose; they are roughly hammered links in a chain of
unequal workmanship, but stretching back through the centuries to the
Munster poets of the days of Elizabeth, advised by Spenser to harry
them out of Ireland. The names change from age to age, that is all.
The verses of the seventeenth century hallow those of MacCarthys and
Fitzgeralds  who fought for the Stuarts or "knocked obedience out of
the Gall"; the eighteenth ended with the rebels of '98; the nineteenth
had Emmet and Mitchell and its Manchester martyrs. Already in these
early days of the twentieth the street singers cry out:

  Mac Dermott, Mallin, Hanrahan, Daly, Colbert and Mac Bride
  All men who for our country's cause have nobly bled and died.

Even Yeats, falling into the tradition, has put in a lyric the names
of some of those who died in Easter week, and through whose death "a
terrible beauty is born."




II


I am glad to remember that through the twelve years of our married
life, 1880-92, my husband and his people were able to keep their liking
and respect for each other. For those were the years of the land war,
tenant struggling to gain a lasting possession for his children,
landlord to keep that which had been given in trust to him for his;
each ready in his anger to turn the heritage of the other to
desolation; while the vision of some went yet farther, through breaking
to the rebuilding of a nation. The passion, the imagination of Ireland
were thrown into the fight. I often thought to find some poem putting
such passion into fiery or memorable lines. But the first I thought
worth the keeping,--I have it yet, was Katherine Tynan's lament for
Parnell, written two years after his death. In tearing it from the
corner of some newspaper I had unwittingly taken note of almost the
moment of a new impulse in literature, in poetry. For with that death,
the loss of that dominant personality, and in the quarrel that
followed, came the disbanding of an army, the unloosing of forces,
the setting free of the imagination of Ireland.




III


Once in my childhood I had been eager to learn Irish; I thought to
get leave to take lessons from an old Scripture-reader who spent a
part of his time in the parish of Killinane, teaching such scholars
as he could find to read their own language in the hope that they might
turn to the only book then being printed in Irish, the Bible. But my
asking, timid with the fear of mockery, was unheeded. Yet I missed
but by a little an opportunity that might have made me a real Irish
scholar, and not as I am, imperfect, stumbling. For a kinsman learned
in the language, the translator of the wonderful _Silva Gaedelica_
had been sometimes a guest in the house, and would still have been
welcomed there but that my mother, who had a great dislike to the marriage
of cousins had fancied he was taking a liking to one of my elder sisters;
and with that suspicion the "winged nymph, Opportunity"  had passed
from my reach. After my marriage I bought a grammar and worked at it
for a while with the help of a gardener. But it was difficult and my
teacher was languid, suspecting  it may be some hidden mockery, for
those were the days before Irish became the fashion. It was not till
a dozen or more years later, and after my husband's death, that my
son, having won the classical entrance scholarship  at Harrow, took
a fancy to learn a nearer language, and rode over to Tillyra before
breakfast  one morning to ask our neighbour Edward Martyn to help him
to a teacher. He came back without what he had sought, but with the
gift of a fine old Irish Bible, which became a help in our early lessons.
For we set to work together, and I found the task a light one in comparison
with those first attempts. For that young priest, Father Eugene O'Growney,
sent from Ireland to look for health in California, had used the short
space of life left to him in writing simple lessons in Irish grammar,
that made at least the first steps easy. And another thing had happened.
Dr. Douglas Hyde, _An Craoibhin,_ had founded the Gaelic League,
and through it country people were gathered together  in the Irish
speaking places to give the songs and poems, old and new, kept in their
memory. This discovery, this disclosure of the folk learning, the folk
poetry, the ancient tradition,  was the small beginning of a weighty
change. It was an upsetting of the table of values, an astonishing
excitement. The imagination  of Ireland had found a new homing place.




IV


My own imagination was aroused. I was becoming conscious of a world
close to me and that I had been ignorant of. It was not now in the
corners of newspapers I looked for poetic emotion, nor even to the
singers in the streets. It was among farmers and potato diggers and
old men in workhouses and beggars at my own door that I found what
was beyond these and yet farther beyond that drawingroom poet of my
childhood in the expression of love, and grief, and the pain of
parting, that are the disclosure  of the individual soul.

An Aran man, repeating to me _The Grief of a Girl's Heart_ in
Irish told me it was with that song his mother had often sung him to
sleep as a child. It was from an old woman who had known Mary Hynes
and who said of her "The sun and the moon never shone upon anything
so handsome" that I first heard Raftery's song of praise of her, "The
pearl that was at Ballylee," a song "that has gone around the world
& as far as America." It was in a stonecutter's house where I went
to have a headstone made for Raftery's grave that I found a manuscript
book of his poems, written out in the clear beautiful Irish characters.
It was to a working farmer's house I walked on many a moonlit evening
with the manuscript that his greater knowledge helped me to understand
and by his hearth that I read for the first time the _Vision of
Death_ and the _Lament for O'Daly._ After that I met with many
old people who had in the days before the Famine seen or talked with
the wandering poet who was in the succession of those who had made
and recited their lyrics on the Irish roads before Chaucer wrote.




V


And so I came by the road nearest me to the old legends, the old heroic
poems. It was a man of a hundred years who told me the story of
Cuchulain's fight with his own son, the son of Aoife, and how the young
man as he lay dying had reproached him and said "Did you not see how
I threw every spear fair and easy at you, and you threw your spear
hard and wicked at me? And I did not come out to tell my name to one
or to two but if I had told it to anyone in the whole world, I would
soonest tell it to your pale face." Deirdre's beauty "that brought
the Sons of Usnach to their death" comes into many of the country songs.
Grania of the yet earlier poems is not so well thought of. An old
basket-maker said scornfully "Many would tell you she slept under the
cromlechs but I don't believe that, and she a king's daughter.  And
I don't believe she was handsome, either. If she was, why would she
have run away?" And another said "Finn had more wisdom than all the
men of the world, but he wasn't wise enough to put a bar on Grania."
I was told in many places of Osgar's bravery and Goll's strength and
Conan's bitter tongue, and the arguments of Oisin and Patrick. And
I have often been given the story of Oisin's journey  to Tir-nan-Og,
the Country of the Young, that is, as I am told, "a fine place and
everything that is good is in it. And if anyone is sent there for a
minute he will want to stop in it, and twenty years will seem to him
like one half hour;" and "they say Tir-nan-Og is there yet, and so
it may be in any place." 




VI


In the ancient times the poets told of this Country of the Young, with
its trees bearing fruit and blossom at the one time; its golden apples
that gave lasting life; its armies "that go out in good order, ahead
of their beautiful king, marching among blue spears scattering their
enemies, an army with high looks, rushing, avenging;" before news had
come to Ireland, of the Evangelist's vision of the Tree of Life and
of the "white horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and a crown
was given to him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer." They
had told of the place "where delight is common, and music" before saintly
Columcille on the night of the Sabbath of rest "reached to the troops
of the archangels and the plain where music has not to be born." But
in later days religion, while offering abundant pictures of an after
world of punishment, "the flagstone of pain," "the cauldron that is
boiling for ever," the fire the least flame of which is "bigger than
fifteen hundred of turf," so that Oisin listening to St. Patrick demands
a familiar weapon, an iron flail, to beat down such familiar terrors,
has left Heaven itself far off, mysterious, intangible, without earthly
similes or foreshadowings.  I think it is perhaps because of this that
the country poets of to-day and yesterday have put their dream, their
vision of the Delectable Mountains, of the Land of Promise, into
exaggerated  praise of places dear to them. Raftery sees something
beyond the barren Mayo bogs when he tells of that "fine place without
fog falling, a blessed place that the sun shines on, and the wind does
not rise there or anything of the sort," and where as he says in
another poem "logwood and mahogany" grow in company with its wind
twisted beech and storm bent sycamore. Even my own home "sweet Coole
demesne" has been transfigured in songs of the neighbourhood; and a
while ago an old woman asking alms at the door while speaking of a
monastery near Athenry broke into a chant of praise that has in it
perhaps some memory of the Well of Healing at the world's end that
helped the gods to new strength in their great battle at Moytura.
"Three barrels there are with water, and to see the first barrel
boiling it is certain you will get a cure. Water there does be rushing
down; you to stop you could hear it talking; to go there you would
get cured of anything  unless it might be the stroke of the Fool."




VII


In translating these poems I have chosen to do so in the speech of
the thatched houses where I have heard and gathered them. _An
Craoibhin_ had already used this Gaelic construction, these
Elizabethan phrases, in translating the _Love Songs of Connacht_,
as I have used it even in my creative work. Synge had not yet used
it when he found in my _Cuchulain of Muirthemne_ "the dialect
he had been trying to master," and of which he afterwards made such
splendid use. Most of the translations in this book have already  been
printed in _Cuchulain of Muirthemne_, _Gods and Fighting Men_,
_Saints and Wonders_, and _Poets and Dreamers_. When in the
first month of the new year I began to choose from among them, it
seemed strange to me that the laments so far outnumbered any songs
of joy. But before that month was out news was brought to me that made
the keening of women for the brave and of those who are left lonely
after the young seem to be but the natural outcome  and expression
of human life.

AUGUSTA GREGORY.

COOLE, May, 1918.




_CONTENTS_


The Grief of a Girl's Heart
A Lament for Fair-Haired Donough that Was Hanged in Galway
Raftery's Praise of Mary Hynes
His Lament for O'Daly
His Praise of the Little Hill and the Plains of Mayo
His Lament for O'Kelly
His Vision of Death
His Repentance
His Answer when Some Stranger Aske Who He Was
A Blessing on Patrick Sarsfield
An Aran Maid's Wedding
A Poem Written in Time of Trouble by an Irish Priest Who Had Taken
     Orders in France
The Heart of the Wood
An Croaibhin Complain Because He Is a Poet
He Cries Out Against Love
He Meditates on the Life of a Rich Man
Forgaill's Praise of Columcille
The Deer's Cry
The Hymn of Molling's Guest, the Man Full of Trouble
The Hag of Beare
The Seven Heavens
The Journey of the Sun
The Nature of the Stars
The Call to Bran
The Army of the Sidhe
Credhe's Complaint at the Battle of the White Strand
A Sleepy Song that Grania Used to Be Singing Over Diarmuid the Time
     They Were Wandering and Hiding From Finn
Her Song to Rouse Him from Sleep
Her Lament for His Death
The Parting of Goll and His Wife
The Death of Osgar
Oisin's Vision
His Praise of Finn
Oisin after the Fenians
The Foretelling of Cathbad the Druid
At Deidre's Birth
Deirdre's Lament for the Sons of Usnach
Emer's Lament for Cuchulain





THE KILTARTAN POETRY BOOK




_The Grief of a Girl's Heart_


O Donall og, if you go across the sea, bring myself with you and do
not forget  it; and you will have a sweetheart for fair days and market
days, and the daughter of the King of Greece beside you at night. It
is late last night the dog was speaking of you; the snipe was speaking
of you in her deep marsh. It is you are the lonely bird through the
woods; and that you may be without a mate until you find me.

You promised me, and you said a lie to me, that you would be before
me where the sheep are flocked; I gave a whistle and three hundred
cries to you, and I found nothing there but a bleating lamb.

You promised me a thing that was hard for you, a ship of gold under
a silver mast; twelve towns with a market in all of them, and a fine
white court by the side of the sea.

You promised me a thing that is not possible, that you would give me
gloves of the skin of a fish; that you would give me shoes of the skin
of a bird, and a suit of the dearest silk in Ireland.

O Donall og, it is I would be better to you than a high, proud,
spendthrift lady: I would milk the cow; I would bring help to you;
and if you were hard pressed, I would strike a blow for you.

O, ochone, and it's not with hunger or with wanting food, or drink,
or sleep, that I am growing thin, and my life is shortened; but it
is the love of a young man has withered me away.

It is early in the morning that I saw him coming, going along the road
on the back of a horse; he did not come to me; he made nothing of me;
and it is on my way home that I cried my fill.

When I go by myself to the Well of Loneliness, I sit down and I go
through my trouble; when I see the world and do not see my boy, he
that has an amber shade in his hair.

It was on that Sunday I gave my love to you; the Sunday that is last
before Easter Sunday. And myself on my knees reading the Passion; and
my two eyes giving love to you for ever.

O, aya! my mother, give myself to him; and give him all that you have
in the world; get out yourself to ask for alms, and do not come back
and forward looking for me.

My mother said to me not to be talking with you to-day, or to-morrow,
or on the Sunday; it was a bad time she took for telling me that; it
was shutting the door after the house was robbed.

My heart is as black as the blackness of the sloe, or as the black
coal that is on the smith's forge; or as the sole of a shoe left in
white halls; it was you put that darkness over my life.

You have taken the east from me; you have taken the west from me; you
have taken what is before me and what is behind me; you have taken
the moon, you have taken the sun from me; and my fear is great that
you have taken God from me!




_A Lament for Fair-Haired Donough that Was Hanged in Galway_


It was bound fast here you saw him, and wondered to see him,
Our fair-haired Donough, and he after being condemned;
There was a little white cap on him in place of a hat,
And a hempen rope in the place of a neck-cloth.

I am after walking here all through the night,
Like a young lamb in a great flock of sheep;
My breast open, my hair loosened out,
And how did I find my brother but stretched before me!

The first place I cried my fill was at the top of the lake;
The second place was at the foot of the gallows;
The third place was at the head of your dead body
Among the Gall, and my own head as if cut in two.

If you were with me in the place you had a right to be,
Down in Sligo or down in Ballinrobe,
It is the gallows would be broken, it is the rope would be cut
And fair-haired Donough going home by the path.

O fair-haired Donough, it is not the gallows was fit for you;
But to be going to the barn, to be threshing out the straw;
To be turning the plough to the right hand and to the left,
To be putting the red side of the soil uppermost.

O fair-haired Donough, O dear brother,
It is well I know who it was took you away from me;
Drinking from the cup, putting a light to the pipe,
And walking in the dew in the cover of the night.

O Michael Malley, O scourge of misfortune!
My brother was no calf of a vagabond cow;
But a well-shaped boy on a height or a hillside,
To knock a low pleasant sound out of a hurling-stick.

And fair-haired Donough, is not that the pity,
You that would carry well a spur or a boot;
I would put clothes in the fashion on you from cloth that would be
     lasting;
I would send you out like a gentleman's son.

O Michael Malley, may your sons never be in one another's company;
May your daughters never ask a marriage portion of you;
The two ends of the table are empty, the house is filled,
And fair-haired Donough, my brother, is stretched out.

There is a marriage portion coming home for Donough,
But it is not cattle or sheep or horses;
But tobacco and pipes and white candles,
And it will not be begrudged to them that will use it.




_Raftery's Praise of Mary Hynes_


Going to Mass by the will of God, the day came wet and the wind rose;
I met Mary Hynes at the cross of Kiltartan, and I fell in love with
her there and then.

I spoke to her kind and mannerly,  as by report was her own way; and
she said "Raftery my mind is easy; you may come to-day to Ballylee."

When I heard her offer I did not linger; when her talk went to my heart
my heart rose. We had only to go across the three fields; we had
daylight with us to Ballylee.

The table was laid with glasses and a quart measure; she had fair hair
and she sitting beside me; and she said, "Drink, Raftery, and a hundred
welcomes; there is a strong cellar in Ballylee."

O star of light and O sun in harvest; O amber hair, O my share of the
world! Will you come with me on the Sunday, till we agree together
before all the people?

I would not begrudge you a song every Sunday  evening; punch on the
table or wine if you would drink it. But O King of Glory, dry the roads
before me till I find the way to Ballylee.

There is sweet air on the side of the hill, when you are looking down
upon Ballylee; when you are walking in the valley picking nuts and
blackberries, there is music of the birds in it and music of the Sidhe.

What is the worth of greatness till you have the light of the flower
of the branch that is by your side? There is no good to deny it or
to try and hide it; she is the sun in the heavens who wounded my heart.

There was no part in Ireland I did not travel, from the rivers to the
tops of the mountains; to the edge of Lough Greine whose mouth is
hidden, and I saw no beauty but was behind hers.   Her hair was shining
and her brows were shining too; her face was like herself, her mouth
pleasant and sweet; She is the pride and I give her the branch; she
is the shining flower of Ballylee.

It is Mary Hynes, the calm and easy woman, has beauty in her mind and
in her face. If a hundred clerks were gathered together, they could
not write down a half of her ways.




_His Lament for O'Daly_


It was Thomas O'Daly that roused up young people and scattered them,
and since death played on him, may God give him grace. The country
is all sorrowful, always talking, since their man of sport died that
would win the goal in all parts with his music. The swans on the water
are nine times blacker than a blackberry since the man died from us
that had pleasantness on the top of his fingers. His two grey eyes
were like the dew of the morning  that lies on the grass. And since
he was laid in the grave, the cold is getting the upper hand.

If you travel the five provinces, you would not find his equal for
countenance or behaviour, for his equal never walked on land or grass.
High King of Nature, you who have all powers in yourself, he that
wasn't narrow-hearted, give him shelter in heaven for it!

He was the beautiful branch. In every quarter  that he ever knew he
would scatter his fill and not gather. He would spend the estate of
the Dalys, their beer and their wine. And that he may be sitting in
the chair of grace, in the middle of Paradise!

A sorrowful story on death, it's he is the ugly chief that did
treachery, that didn't give him credit, O strong God, for a little
time.

There are young women, and not without reason, sorry and heart-broken
and withered, since he was left at the church. Their hair thrown down
and hanging, turned grey on their head.

No flower in any garden, and the leaves of the trees have leave to
cry, and they falling on the ground. There is no green flower on the
tops of the tufts, since there did a boarded coffin go on Daly.

There is sorrow on the men of mirth, a clouding over the day, and no
trout swim in the river. Orpheus on the harp, he lifted up everyone
out of their habits; and he that stole what Argus was watching the
time he took away Io; Apollo, as we read, gave them teaching, and Daly
was better than all these musicians.

A hundred wouldn't be able to put together his actions and his deeds
and his many good works. And Raftery says this much for Daly, because
he liked him.



_His Praise of the Little Hill and the Plains of Mayo_


After the Christmas, with the help of Christ, I will never stop if
I am alive; I will go to the sharp-edged little hill; for it is a fine
place without fog falling; a blessed place  that  the sun shines on,
and the wind doesn't rise there or anything of the sort.

And if you were a year there you would get no rest, only sitting up
at night and forever drinking.  The lamb and the sheep are there; the
cow and the calf are there, fine lands are there without  heath and
without bog. Ploughing & seed-sowing in the right month, plough and
harrow prepared and ready; the rent that is called for there, they
have means to pay it. There is oats and flax & large eared barley.
There are beautiful  valleys with good growth in them and hay. Rods
grow there, and bushes and tufts, white fields are there and respect
for trees; shade and shelter from wind and rain; priests and friars
reading their book; spending and getting is there, and nothing scarce.

I leave it in my will that my heart rises as the wind rises, and as
the fog scatters, when I think upon Carra and the two towns below it,
on the two-mile bush and on the plains of Mayo. And if I were standing
in the middle of my people, age would go from me and I would be young
again.




_His Lament for O'Kelly_


There's no dew or grass on Cluan Leathan. The cuckoo is not to be seen
on the furze; the leaves are withering and the trees complaining of
the cold. There is no sun or moon in the air or in the sky, or no light
in the stars coming down, with the stretching of O'Kelly in the grave.

My grief to tell it! he to be laid low; the man that did not bring
grief or trouble on any heart, that would give help to those that were
down.

No light on the day like there was; the fruits not growing; no children
on the breast; there's no return in the grain; the plants don't blossom
as they used since O'Kelly with the fair hair went away; he that used
to forgive us a great share of the rent. Since the children of Usnach
and Deirdre went to the grave, and Cuchulain, who as the stories tell
us, would gain victory in every step he would take; since he died,
such a story never came of sorrow or defeat; since the Gael were sold
at Aughrim, and since Owen Roe died, the Branch.




_His Vision of Death_


I had a vision in my sleep last night between  sleeping and waking.
A figure standing beside me, thin, miserable, sad and sorrowful; the
shadow of night upon his face, the tracks of the tears down his cheeks.
His ribs were bending like the bottom of a riddle; his nose thin that
it would go through a cambric needle; his shoulders hard and sharp
that they would cut tobacco; his head dark and bushy like the top of
a hill; and there is nothing I can liken his fingers to. His poor bones
without any kind of covering; a withered rod in his hand, and he looking
in my face....

Death is a robber who heaps together kings, high princes and country
lords; he brings with him the great, the young, and the wise, gripping
them by the throat before all the people. Look at him who was yesterday
swift & strong, who would leap stone wall, ditch and gap. Who was in
the evening walking the street, and is going under the clay on the
morrow.

It is a pity for him that is tempted with the temptations of the world;
and the store that will go with him is so weak, and his lease of life
no better if he were to live for a thousand years than just as if he
had slipped over on a visit and back again.

When you are going to lie down don't be dumb. Bare your knee and bruise
the ground. Think of all the deeds that you put by you, and that you
are travelling towards the meadow of the dead.



_His Repentance_


O King who art in Heaven, I scream to Thee again and aloud, for it
is Thy grace I am hoping for.

I am in age and my shape is withered; many a day I have been going
astray. When I was young my deeds were evil; I delighted greatly in
quarrels and rows. I liked much better to be playing or drinking on
a Sunday morning than to be going to Mass. I was given to great oaths,
and I did not let lust or drunkenness pass me by.

The day has stolen away and I have not raised the hedge, until the
crop in which Thou didst take delight is destroyed. I am a worthless
stake in the corner of a hedge, or I am like a boat that has lost its
rudder, that would be broken against a rock in the sea, and that would
be drowned in the cold waves.




_His Answer When Some Stranger Asked Who He Was_


I am Raftery the poet, full of hope and love; my eyes without light,
my gentleness  without misery. Going west on my journey with the light
of my heart; weak and tired to the end of my road.

I am now, and my back to a wall, playing music to empty pockets.




_A Blessing on Patrick Sarsfield_


O Patrick Sarsfield, health be to you, since you went to France and
your camps were loosened; making your sighs along with the king, and
you left poor Ireland and the Gael defeated--Och ochone! O Patrick
Sarsfield, it is a man with God you are; and blessed is the earth you
ever walked on. The blessing of the bright sun and the moon upon you,
since you took the day from the hands of King William--Och ochone!

O Patrick Sarsfield, the prayer of every person with you; my own prayer
and the prayer of the Son of Mary with you, since you took the narrow
ford going through Biorra, and since at Cuilenn O'Cuanac you won
Limerick--Och ochone!

I will go up on the mountain alone; and I will come hither from it
again. It is there I saw the camp of the Gael, the poor troop thinned,
not keeping with one another--Och ochone!

My five hundred healths to you, halls of Limerick, and to the beautiful
troop was in our company; it is bonefires we used to have and playing-
cards, and the word of God was often with us--Och ochone!

There were many soldiers glad and happy, that were going the way
through seven weeks; but now they are stretched down in Aughrim--Och
ochone!

They put the first breaking on us at the bridge of the Boyne; the
second breaking on the bridge of Slaine; the third breaking in Aughrim
of O'Kelly; and O sweet Ireland, my five hundred healths to you--Och
ochone!

O'Kelly has manuring for his land, that is not sand or dung, but ready
soldiers doing bravery with pikes, that were left in Aughrim stretched
in ridges--Och ochone!

Who is that beyond on the hill, Ben Edair? I a poor soldier with King
James. I was last year in arms and in dress, but this year I am asking
alms--Och ochone!




_An Aran Maid's Wedding_


I am widow and maid, and I very young; did you hear my great grief,
that my treasure was drowned? If I had been in the boat that day, and
my hand on the rope, my word to you, O'Reilly, it is I would have saved
you sorrow.

Do you remember the day the street was full of riders, and of priests
and brothers, and all talking of the wedding feast? The fiddle was
there in the middle, and the harp answering to it; and twelve mannerly
women to bring my love to his bed.

But you were of those three that went across to Kilcomin, ferrying
Father Peter, who was three-and-eighty years old; if you came back
within a month itself, I would be well content; but is it not a pity
I to be lonely, and my first love in the waves?

I would not begrudge you, O'Reilly, to be kinsman to a king, white
bright courts around you, and you lying at your ease; a quiet, well-
learned lady to be settling out your pillow; but it is a great thing
you to die from me when I had given you my love entirely.

It is no wonder a broken heart to be with your father and your mother;
the white-breasted mother that crooned you, and you a baby; your wedded
wife, O thousand treasures, that never set out your bed; and the day
you went to Trabawn, how well it failed you to come home.

Your eyes are with the eels, and your lips with the crabs; and your
two white hands under the sharp rule of the salmon. Five pounds I would
give to him that would find my true love. Ochone! it is you are a sharp
grief to young Mary ni-Curtain!




_A Poem Written in Time of Trouble by an Irish Priest Who Had Taken
Orders in France_


  My thoughts, my grief! are without strength
  My spirit is journeying towards death
  My eyes are as a frozen sea
  My tears my daily food;
  There is nothing in life but only misery.
  My poor heart is torn
  And my thoughts are sharp wounds within me,
  Mourning the miserable state of Ireland.

  Misfortune has come upon us all together
  The poor, the rich, the weak and the strong
  The great lord by whom hundreds were maintained
  The powerful strong man, and the man that holds the plough;
  And the cross laid on the bare shoulder of every man.

  Our feasts are without any voice of priests
  And none at them but women lamenting
  Tearing their hair with troubled minds
  Keening miserably after the Fenians.

  The pipes of our organs are broken
  Our harps have lost their strings that were tuned
  That might have made the great lamentations of Ireland.
  Until the strong men come back across the sea
  There is no help for us but bitter crying,
  Screams, and beating of hands, and calling out.

  I do not know of anything under the sky
  That is friendly or favourable to the Gael

  But only the sea that our need brings us to,
  Or the wind that blows to the harbour
  The ship that is bearing us away from Ireland;
  And there is reason that these are reconciled with us,
  For we increase the sea with our tears
  And the wandering wind with our sighs.




_The Heart of the Wood_


My hope and my love, we will go for a while into the wood, scattering
the dew, where we will see the trout, we will see the blackbird on
its nest; the deer and the buck calling, the little bird that is sweetest
singing on the branches; the cuckoo on the top of the fresh green;
and death will never come near us for ever in the sweet wood.




_An Craoibhin Complains Because He Is a Poet_


  It's my grief that I am not a little white duck,
  And I'd swim over the sea to France or to Spain;
  I would not stay in Ireland for one week only,
  To be without eating, without drinking, without a full jug.

  Without a full jug, without eating, without drinking,
  Without a feast to get, without wine, without meat,
  Without high dances, without a big name, without music;
  There is hunger on me, and I astray this long time.

  It's my grief that I am not an old crow,
  I would sit for awhile up on the old branch,
  I could satisfy my hunger, and I not as I am
  With a grain of oats or a white potato

  It's my grief that I am not a red fox,
  Leaping strong and swift on the mountains,
  Eating cocks and hens without pity,
  Taking ducks and geese as a conquerer.

  It's my grief that I am not a bright salmon,
  Going through the strong full water,
  Catching the mayflies by my craft,
  Swimming at my choice, and swimming with
    the stream

  It's my grief that I am of the race of the poets;
  It would be better for me to be a high rock,
  Or a stone or a tree or an herb or a flower
  Or anything at all but the thing that I am!




_He Cries Out Against Love_


  There are three fine devils eating my heart--
  They left me, my grief! without a thing;
  Sickness wrought, and Love wrought,
  And an empty pocket, my ruin and my woe.
  Poverty left me without a shirt,
  Barefooted, barelegged, without any covering;
  Sickness left me with my head weak
  And my body miserable, an ugly thing.
  Love left me like a coal upon the floor,
  Like a half-burned sod that is never put out.
  Worse than the cough, worse than the fever itself,
  Worse than any curse at all under the sun,
  Worse than the great poverty
  Is the devil that is called "Love" by the people.
  And if I were in my young youth again
  I would not take, or give, or ask for a kiss!




_He Meditates on the Life of a Rich Man_


  A golden cradle under you, and you young;
  A right mother and a strong kiss.

  A lively horse, and you a boy;
  A school and learning and close companions.

  A beautiful wife, and you a man;
  A wide house and everything that is good.

  A fine wife, children, substance;
  Cattle, means, herds and flocks.

  A place to sit, a place to lie down;
  Plenty of food and plenty of drink.
  After that, an old man among old men;
  Respect on you and honour on you.

  Head of the court, of the jury, of the meeting,
  And the counsellors not the worse for having you.

  At the end of your days death, and then
  Hiding away; the boards and the church.

  What are you better after to-night
  Than Ned the beggar or Seaghan the fool?




_Forgaill's Praise of Columcille_


This now is the poem of praise and of lamentation that was made for
Columcille, Speckled Salmon of the Boyne, High Saint of the Gael, by
Forgaill that was afterwards called Blind Forgaill, Chief Poet of
Ireland:

It is not a little story this is; it is not a story about a fool it
is; it is not one district that is keening but every district, with
a great sound that is not to be borne, hearing the story of Columcille,
without life, without a church.

It is not the trouble of one house, or the grief of one harp-string;
all the plains are heavy, hearing the word that is a wound.

What way will a simple man tell of him? Even Nera from the Sidhe could
not do it; he is not made much of now; our learned one is not the light
of our life, now he is hidden away from us.

He that used to keep us living is dead; he that was our rightful head
has died from us; he has died from us that was God's messenger.

The knowledgeable man that used to put fear from us is not here; the
teller of words does not return to us; the teacher is gone from us
that taught silence to the people.

The whole world was his; it is a harp without its strings; it is a
church without its abbot.

Colum rose very high the time God's companies rose to meet him; it
is bright the angels were, attending on him.

It is short his life was, it is little used to satisfy him; when the
wind blew the sheet against him on the sand, the shape of his ribs
could be seen through it. He was the head of every gathering; he was
a dun of the book of the law; he put a flame in the district of the
north, he lightened the district of the west; the east was his along
with it; he did not open his heart to every company. Good his death;
he went with God's angels that came to meet him.

He has reached to Axal of his help and to the troops of the archangels;
he has reached to a place where night is not seen; he has reached to
a plain where music has not to be born; where no one listens to
oppression. The King of priests has done away with his troubles.

He knew the way he was going; he gave kindness for hatred; he learned
psalms; he broke the battle against hunger.

He knew seasons and storms; he read the secrets of the great wisdom;
he knew the course of the moon; he took notice of its race with the
branching sun. He was skilful in the course of the sea; to tell every
high thing we have heard from Colum, would be to count the stars of
heaven.

A healer of the heart of the wise; a full satisfier of guests; our
crowned one who spoke with Axal; a shelter to the naked; a comforter
to the poor; he was eager, he was noble, it is high his death was.
We hope great honour will be given to him on the head of these deeds.

And when Forgaill had made that lament he said, "It is a great shaping
and a great finish I have given to these words, and I cannot make a
praise beyond this, for my eyes have been taken from me."

It was Aodh, King of Ireland gave seven cumhals for his name to be
given in the praising of Columcille; and Aodh laid it down to Forgaill
that this song should be above every other song.

But it was after death the reward and the praise were given to blind
Forgaill for it was Heaven that was given to him as the price of the
praising of the King.




_The Deer's Cry_


Blessed Patrick made this hymn one time he was going to preach the
Faith at Teamhuir, and his enemies lay in hiding to make an attack
on him as he passed. But all they could see passing as he himself and
Benen his servant went by, was a wild deer and a fawn.   And the Deer's
Cry is the name of the hymn to this day.

I bind myself to-day to a strong strength, to a calling on the Trinity.
I believe in a Threeness with confession of a Oneness in the Creator
of the World.

I bind myself to-day to the strength of Christ's birth and His baptism;
to the strength of His crucifixion with His burial; to the strength
of His resurrection with His ascension; In stability of earth, in
steadfastness of rock, I bind to myself to-day God's strength to pilot
me;

God's power to uphold me; God's wisdom to guide me; God's eye to look
before me; God's ear to hear me;

God's word to speak for me; God's hand to guard me; God's path to lie
before me; God's shield to protect me; God's host to save me;

Against snares of demons; against the begging of sins; against the
asking of nature; against all my ill-wishers near me and far from me;
alone and in a crowd.

So I have called on all these strengths to come between me and every
fierce and merciless strength that may come between my body and my
soul;

Against incantations of false prophets; against black laws of heathens;
against false laws of heretics; against craft of idolatry; against
spells of women & smiths and druids; against every knowledge forbidden
to the souls of men.

Christ for my protection to-day against poison, against burning,
against drowning, against wounding; that a multitude of rewards may
come to me. Christ with me, Christ before me; Christ behind me, Christ
in me; Christ under me, Christ over me; Christ to the right of me,
Christ to the left of me; Christ in lying down, Christ in sitting,
Christ in rising up;

Christ in the heart of everyone that thinks of me; Christ in the mouth
of everyone that speaks to me; Christ in every eye that sees me; Christ
in every ear that hears me.

I bind to myself to-day a strong strength to a calling upon the
Trinity; I believe in a Threeness with confession of a Oneness in the
Creator of the World.




_The Hymn of Molling's Guest, the Man Full of Trouble_


He is clean gold, he is Heaven about the sun, he is a silver vessel
having wine in it; he is an angel, he is the wisdom of saints; everyone
that is doing the will of the King.

He is a bird with a trap closing about him; he is a broken ship in
great danger; he is an empty vessel, he is a withered tree; he that
is not doing the will of the King.

He is a sweet-smelling branch with its blossoms; he is a vessel that
is full of honey; he is a shining stone of good luck; he who does the
will of the Son of God of Heaven.

He is a blind nut without profit; he is ill-smelling rottenness, he
is a withered tree; he is a wild apple branch without blossom; he that
is not doing the will of the King.

If he does the will of the Son of God of Heaven, he is a bright sun
with summer about it; he is the image of the God of Heaven; he is a
vessel of clear glass.

He is a racehorse over a smooth plain, the man that is striving for
the kingdom of the great God; he is a chariot that is seen under a
king, that wins the victory with golden bridles.

He is a sun that warms high heaven; the king to whom the great King
is thankful; he is a church, joyful, noble; he is a shrine having gold
about it.

He is an altar having wine poured upon it; having many quires singing
around; he is a clean chalice with ale in it; he is bronze, white,
shining, he is gold.




_The Hag of Beare_


It is of Corca Dubhne she was, and she had her youth seven times over,
and every man that had lived with her died of old age, and her
grandsons and great-grandsons were tribes and races. And through a
hundred years she wore upon her head the veil Cuimire had blessed.
Then age and weakness came upon her and it is what she said:

Ebb-tide to me as to the sea; old age brings me reproach; I used to
wear a shift that was always new; to-day, I have not even a cast one.

It is riches you are loving, it is not men; it was men we loved in
the time we were living.

There were dear men on whose plains we used to be driving; it is good
the time we passed with them; it is little we were broken afterwards.

When my arms are seen it is long and thin they are; once they used
to be fondling, they used to be around great kings.

The young girls give a welcome to Beltaine when it comes to them;
sorrow is more fitting for me; an old pitiful hag.

I have no pleasant talk; no sheep are killed for my wedding; it is
little but my hair is grey; it is many colours I had over it when I
used to be drinking good ale.

I have no envy against the old, but only against women; I myself am
spent with old age, while women's heads are still yellow.

The stone of the kings on Feman; the chair of Ronan in Bregia; it is
long since storms have wrecked them, they are old mouldering
gravestones.

The wave of the great sea is speaking; the winter is striking us with
it; I do not look to welcome to-day Fermuid son of Mugh.

I know what they are doing; they are rowing through the reeds of the
ford of Alma; it is cold is the place where they sleep.

The summer of youth where we were has been spent along with its
harvest; winter age that drowns everyone, its beginning has come upon
me.

It is beautiful was my green cloak, my king liked to see it on me;
it is noble was the man that stirred it, he put wool on it when it
was bare.

Amen, great is the pity; every acorn has to drop. After feasting with
shining candles, to be in the darkness of a prayer-house.

I was once living with kings, drinking mead and wine; to-day I am
drinking whey-water among withered old women.

There are three floods that come up to the dun of Ard-Ruide: a flood
of fighting-men, a flood of horses, a flood of the hounds of Lugaidh's
son.

The flood-wave and the two swift ebb-tides; what the flood-wave brings
you in, the ebb-wave sweeps out of your hand.

The flood-wave and the second ebb-tide; they have all come as far as
me, the way that I know them well.

The flood-tide will not reach to the silence of my kitchen; though
many are my company in the darkness, a hand has been laid upon them
all. My flood-tide! It is well I have kept my knowledge. It is Jesus
Son of Mary keeps me happy at the ebb-tide.

It is far is the island of the great sea where the flood reaches after
the ebb: I do not look for floods to reach to me after the ebb-tide.

There is hardly a little place I can know again when I see it; what
used to be on the flood-tide is all on the ebb to-day!




_Some of the Wonders Told at the Great in the East of the
World by the Voice of Philip the Apostle, that Was Like the Laughter
of an Army, and With that No Louder than the Talk of Friend in the
Ear of Friend;_



_I. The Seven Heavens_


As to the Seven Heavens that are around the earth, the first of them
is the bright cloudy heaven that is the nearest and that has shining
out of it the moon and the scattering of stars.   Beyond that are two
flaming heavens, angels are in  them and  the breaking loose of winds.
Beyond those an ice-cold heaven, bluer than any blue, seven times
colder than any snow, and it is out of that comes the shining of the
sun. Two heavens there are above that again, bright like flame, and
it is out of them shine the fiery stars that put fruitfulness in the
clouds and in the sea. A high heaven, high and fiery, there is above
all the rest; highest of all it is, having within it the rolling of
the skies, and the labour of music, and quires of angels. In the belts,
now, of the seven heavens are hidden the twelve shaking beasts that
have fiery heads upon their heavenly bodies and that are blowing twelve
winds about the world.

In the same belts are sleeping the dragons with fiery breath, tower-
headed, blemished, that give out the crash of the thunders and blow
lightnings out of their eyes.



_II. The Journey of the Sun_


God made on the fourth day the two and seventy kinds of the wandering
stars of heaven, and the fiery course of the sun that warms the world
with the sense and the splendour of angels.

Twelve plains there are under the body of the earth he lightens every
night; the fiery sea laughs against his journey; ranks of angels come
together, welcoming his visit after the brightness of the night. The
first place he brightens is the stream beyond the seas, with news of
the eastern waters. Then he lightens the ocean of fire and the seas
of sulphur-fire that are round about the red countries.

Then he shines upon the troops of boys in the pleasant fields, who
send out their cry to heaven through dread of the beast that kills
thousands of armies under the waves of the south. Then he shines upon
the mountains that have streams of fire, on the hosts that protect
them in the plains. Then the ribs of the great beast shine, and the
four and twenty champions rise up in the valley of pain. He shines
over against the terrible many-thronged fence in the north that has
closed around the people of hell. He shines on the dark valleys having
sorrowful streams over their faces. He brightens the ribs of the beast
that sends out the many seas around the earth; that sucks in again
the many seas till the sands on every side are dry. He shines upon
the many beasts that sleep their sleep of tears in the valley of flowers
from the first beginning of the world; and on the sorrowful tearful
plain, with the dragons that were set under the mist. He shines then
upon the bird-flocks singing their many tunes in the flower-valleys;
upon the shining plains with the wine-flowers that lighten the valley;
he shines at the last against Adam's Paradise till he rises up in the
morning from the east. There would be many stories now for the sun
to tell upon his journey, if he had but a tongue to give them out.



_III. The Nature of the Stars_


The stars now differ in their nature from one another. As to the ten
stars of Gaburn, trembling takes hold of them, and fiery manes are
put over their faces, to foretell a plague or a death of the people.
Other stars there are that bring great heat or great cold or great
mists upon the earth, others there are that run to encourage the dragons
that blow lightnings on the world; others of them run to the end of
fifty years and then ask their time for sleeping. To the end of seven
years they sleep till they awake at the shout of the blessed angels,
and the voices of the dragons of the valley. Other runs through the
six days and the six nights till the coming of the Sunday; at its beginning
they begin their many kinds of music, and they fall asleep again till
the coming again from heaven of God's Sunday, and with that they follow
the same round.




_The Call to Bran_


One time Bran, son of Febal, was out by himself near his dun, and he
heard music behind him. And it kept always after him, and at last he
fell asleep with the sweetness of the sound. And when he awoke from
his sleep he saw beside him a branch of silver, and it having white
blossoms, and the whiteness of the silver was the same as the whiteness
of the blossoms. And he brought the branch in his hand into the royal
house, and when all his people were with him they saw a woman with
strange clothing standing in the house. And she began to make a song
for Bran, and all the people were looking at her and listening to her,
and it is what she said: I bring a branch of the apple-tree from
Emhain, from the far island around which are the shining horses of
the Son of Lir. A delight of the eyes is the plain where the hosts
hold their games: curragh racing against chariot in the Silver-White
Plain to the south.

There are feet of white bronze under it, shining through life and time;
a comely level land through the length of the world's age, and many
blossoms falling on it.

There is an old tree there with blossoms, and birds calling from among
them; every colour is shining there. Delight is common, and music in
the Gentle Voiced Plain, in the Silver Cloud Plain to the south. There
is nothing hard or rough, but sweet music striking on the ear; keening
is not used, or treachery, in the tilled familiar land.

To be without grief, without sorrow, without death, without any
sickness, without weakness; that is the sign of Emhain; it is not a
common wonder that is.

There is nothing to liken its mists to, the sea washes the wave against
the land; brightness falls from its hair.

Golden chariots in the Plain of the Sea, rising up to the sun with
the tide; silver chariots and bronze chariots on the Plain of Sports.

It is a day of lasting weather, silver is dropping on the land; a pure
white cliff on the edge of the sea, getting its warmth from the sun.

The host race over the Plain of Sports; it is beautiful and not weak
their game is; death or the ebbing of the tide will not come to them
in the Many-coloured Land.

There will come at sunrise a fair man, lighting up the level lands;
he rides upon the plain that is beaten by the waves, he stirs the sea
till it is like blood. An army will come over the clear sea, rowing
to the stone that is in sight, that has a hundred sounds of music.

It sings a song to the army; it is not sad through the length of time;
it increases music with hundreds singing together; they do not look
for death or the ebb-tide.




_The Army of the Sidhe_

Laegaire, son of the king of Connacht, was out one day with the king
his father near Loch  na-n Ean, the Lake of Birds, and the men of
Connacht with them, and they saw a man coming to them through the mist.
Long golden-yellow hair he had, and at his belt a gold-hilted sword,
and in his hand two five-barbed darts; a gold-rimmed shield on his
back, a five-folded crimson cloak about his shoulders, and it is what
he said:

The most beautiful of plains is the Plain of the Two Mists; it is not
far from this; the men of its army in good order go out ahead of their
beautiful king; they march among blue spears, white troops of fighters
with curled hair.

They scatter the troops of their enemies, they destroy every country
they make an attack on; they are beautiful in battle, a host with high
looks, rushing, avenging.

It is no wonder they to have such strength every one of them is the
son of a king and a queen; manes of hair they have of the colour of
gold. Their bodies smooth and comely; their eyes blue and far-seeing;
their teeth bright like crystal within their thin red lips.

White shields they have in their hands, with patterns on them of white
silver; blue shining swords, red horns set with gold. They are good
at killing men in battle; good at song-making, good at chess-playing.

The most beautiful of plains is the Plain of the Two Mists; it is not
far from this place.




_Credhe's Complaint at the Battle of the White Strand_


And Credhe came to where her man was, and  she keened him and cried
over him, and she made this complaint: The Harbour roars, O the harbour
roars over the rushing race of the Headland of the Two Storms, the
drowning of the hero of the Lake of the Two Dogs, that is what the
waves are keening on the strand.

Sweet-voiced is the crane, O sweet-voiced is the crane in the marshes
of the Ridge of the Two Strong Men; it is she cannot save her
nestlings, the wild dog of two colours is taking her little ones.

Pitiful the cry, pitiful the cry the thrush is making in the Pleasant
Ridge; sorrowful is the cry of the blackbird in Leiter Laeig.

Sorrowful the call, O sorrowful the call of the deer in the Ridge of
Two Lights; the doe is lying dead in Druim Silenn, the mighty stag
cries after her.

Sorrowful to me, O sorrowful to me the death of the hero that lay
beside me; the son of the woman of the Wood of the Two Thickets, to
be with a bunch of grass under his head.

Sore to me, O sore to me Cael to be a dead man beside me, the waves
to have gone over his white body; it is his pleasantness that has put
my wits astray.

A woeful shout, O a woeful shout the waves are making on the strand;
they that took hold of comely Cael, a pity it is he went to meet them.

A woeful crash, O a woeful crash the waves are making on the strand
to the north; breaking against the smooth rock, crying after Cael now
he is gone.

A sorrowful fight, O a sorrowful fight, the sea is making with the
strand to the north; my beauty is lessened; the end of my life is
measured.

A song of grief, O a song of grief is made by the waves of Tulcha Leis;
all I had is gone since this story came to me. Since the son of
Crimthann  is drowned I will love no one after him for ever; many a
king fell by his hand; his shield never cried out in the battle.

After she had made that complaint Credhe laid herself down beside Cael
and died for grief after him. And they were put in the one grave, and
it was Caoilte raised the stone over them.




_A Sleepy Song that Grania Used to Be Singing over Diarmuid the Time
They Were Wandering and Hiding from Finn_


Sleep a little, a little little, for there is nothing at all to fear,
Diarmuid grandson of Duibhne; sleep here soundly, Diarmuid to whom
I have given my love. It is I will keep watch for you, grandchild of
shapely Duibhne; sleep a little, a blessing on you, beside the well
of the strong field; my lamb from above the lake, from the banks of
the strong streams.

Let your sleep be like the sleep in the North of fair comely Fionnchadh
of Ess Ruadh, the time he took Slaine with bravery as we think, in
spite of Failbhe of the Hard Head.

Let your sleep be like the sleep in the West of Aine daughter of
Galian, the time she went on a journey in the night with Dubhthach
from Dorinis, by the light of torches.

Let your sleep be like the sleep in the East of Deaghadh the proud,
the brave fighter, the time he took Coincheann, daughter of Binn, in
spite of fierce Decheall of Duibhreann.

O heart of the valour of the world to the west of Greece, my heart
will go near to breaking if I do not see you every day. The parting
of us two will be the parting of two children of the one house; it
will be the parting of life from the body, Diarmuid.




_Her Song to Rouse Him from Sleep_


The stag to the east is not asleep, he does not stop from bellowing;
though he is in the woods of the blackbirds, sleep is not in his mind;
the hornless doe is not asleep, crying after her speckled fawn; she
is going over the bushes, she does not sleep in her home.

The cuckoo is not asleep, the thrush is not asleep, the tops of the
trees are a noisy place; the duck is not asleep, she is made ready
for good swimming; the bog-lark is not asleep tonight on the high stormy
bogs; the sound of her clear voice is sweet; she is not sleeping
between the streams.




_Her Lament for His Death_


Then when Grania was certain of Diarmuid's death she gave out a long
very pitiful cry that was heard through the whole place, and her women
and her people came to her, and asked what ailed her to give a cry
like that. And she told them how Diarmuid had come to his death by
the Boar of Beinn Gulbain in the hunt Finn had made. When her people
heard that, they gave three great heavy cries in the same way, that
were heard in the clouds and the waste places of the sky. And then
Grania bade the five hundred that she had for household to go to Beinn
Gulbain for the body of Diarmuid, and when they were bringing it back,
she went out to meet them, and they put down the body of Diarmuid,
and it is what she said: I am your wife, beautiful Diarmuid, the man
I would do no hurt to; it is sorrowful I am after you to-night.

I am looking at the hawk and the hound my secret love used to be
hunting with; she that loved the three, let her be put in the grave
with Diarmuid.

Let us be glad to-night, let us make all welcome to-night, let us be
open-handed to-night, since we are sitting by the body of a king.

And O Diarmuid, she said, it is a hard bed Finn has given you, to be
lying on the stones and to be wet with the rain. Ochone! she said,
your blue eyes to be without sight, you that were friendly and generous
and pursuing. O love! O Diarmuid! it is a pity it is he sent you to
your death.

You were a champion of the men of Ireland, their prop in the middle
of the fight; you were the head of every battle; your ways were glad
and pleasant.

It is sorrowful I am, without mirth, without light, but only sadness
and grief and long dying; your harp used to be sweet to me, it wakened
my heart to gladness. Now my courage is fallen down, I not to hear
you but to be always remembering your ways. Och! my grief is going
through me.

A thousand curses on the day when Grania gave you her love, that put
Finn of the princes from his wits; it is a sorrowful story your death
is to-day.

You were the man was best of the Fenians, beautiful Diarmuid, that
women loved. It is dark your dwelling-place is under the sod, it is
mournful and cold your bed is; it is pleasant your laugh was to-day;
you were my happiness, Diarmuid.




_The Parting of Goll and His Wife_


And when Goll knew Finn to be watching for his life he made no attempt
to escape but stopped where he was, without food, without drink, and
he blinded with the sand that was blowing into his eyes.

And his wife came to a rock where she could speak with him, and she
called to him to come to her. "Come over to me," she said; "and it
is a pity you to be blinded where you are, on the rocks of the waste
sea, with no drink but the salt water, a man that was first in every
fight. And come now to be sleeping beside me," she said; "and in place
of the hard sea-water I will nourish you from my own breast, and it
is I will do your healing," she said; "for it is seven years since
you wedded with me, and from that night to this night I never got a
hard word from you. And the gold of your hair is my desire for ever,"
she said, "and do not stop withering there like an herb in the winter-time,
and my heart black with grief within me."

But Goll would not leave the spot where he was for all she could say.
"It is best as it is," he said, "and I never took the advice of a woman
east or west, and I never will take it. And O sweet-voiced queen,"
he said, "what ails you to be fretting after me; and remember now your
silver and your gold, and your silks and stuffs, and remember the seven
hounds I gave you at Cruadh Ceirrge, and every one of them without
slackness till he has killed the deer. And do not be crying tears after
me, queen with the white hands," he said; "but remember your constant
lover, Aodh, the son of the best woman of the world, that came out
from Spain asking for you, and that I fought at Corcar-an-Deirg. And
go to him now," he said, "for it is bad when a woman is in want of
a good man."

And he lay down on the rocks, and at the end of twelve days he died.
And his wife keened him there, and made a great lamentation for her
husband that had such a great name, and that was the second best of
the Fenians of Ireland.




_The Death of Osgar_


And after a while, at noonday, they saw Finn coming towards them, and
what was left of the Sun-banner raised on a spear-shaft. All of them
saluted Finn then, but he made no answer, and he came up to the hill
where Osgar was. And when Osgar saw him coming he saluted him, and
he said, "I have got my desire in death, Finn of the sharp arms." And
Finn said, "It is worse the way you were, my son, on the day of the
battle at Ben Edair, when the wild geese could swim on your breast,
and it was my hand that gave you healing." "There can no healing be
done for me now for ever," said Osgar, "since the King of Ireland put
the spear of seven spells through my body."

And Finn said, "it is a pity it was not I myself fell in sunny scarce
Gabhra, and you going east and west at the head of the Fenians." "And
if it was yourself fell in the battle," said Osgar, "you would not
hear me keening after you; for no man ever knew any heart in me," he
said, "but a heart of twisted horn, and it covered with iron. But the
howling of the dogs beside me," he said, "and the keening of the old
fighting men and the crying of the women one after another, those are
the things that are vexing me." And Finn said: "child of my child,
calf of my calf, white and slender, it is a pity the way you are. And
my heart is starting like a deer," he said, "and I am weak after you
and after the Fenians of Ireland. And misfortune has followed us,"
he said, "and farewell now to battles and to a great name, and farewell
to taking tributes; for every good thing I ever had is gone from me
now," he said. And when Osgar heard those words he stretched out his
hands, and his eyelids closed. And Finn turned away from the rest,
and he cried tears down; and he never shed a tear through the whole
length of his lifetime but only for Osgar and for Bran.




_Oisin's Vision_


I saw the household of Finn; it was not the household of a soft race;
I had a vision of that man yesterday.

I saw the household of the High King, he with the brown sweet-voiced
son; I never saw a better man.

I saw the household of Finn; no one saw it as I saw it; I saw Finn
with the sword, Mac an Luin. Och! it was sorrowful to see it.

I cannot tell out every harm that is on my head; free us from our
trouble for ever; I have seen the household of Finn.




_His Praise of Finn_


It is a week from yesterday I last saw Finn; I never saw a braver man.
A king of heavy blows; my law, my adviser, my sense and my wisdom,
prince and poet, braver than kings, King of the Fenians, brave in all
countries; golden salmon of the sea, clean hawk of the air, rightly
taught, avoiding lies; strong in his doings, a right judge, ready in
courage, a high messenger in bravery and in music.

His skin lime-white, his hair golden; ready to work, gentle to women;
his great green vessels full of rough sharp wine. It is rich the king
was, the head of his people.

Seven sides Finn's house had, and seven score shields on every side.
Fifty fighting men he had about him having woollen cloaks; ten bright
drinking-cups in his hall, ten blue vessels, ten golden horns.

It is a good household Finn had, without grudging, without lust,
without vain boasting, without chattering, without any slur on any
one of the Fenians. Finn never refused any man: he never put away any
one that came to his house. If the brown leaves falling in the woods
were gold, if the white waves were silver, Finn would have given away
the whole of it.




_Oisin after the Fenians_


Now my strength is gone from me, I that was adviser to the Fenians,
my whole body is tired to-night, my hands, my feet, and my head; tired,
tired, tired.

It is bad the way I am after Finn of the Fenians; since he is gone
away, every good is behind me.

Without great people, without mannerly ways; it is sorrowful I am after
our king that is gone.

I am a shaking tree, my leaves gone from me; an empty nut, a horse
without a bridle; a people without a dwelling-place, I Oisin, son of
Finn.

It is long the clouds are over me to-night! it is long last night was;
although this day is long, yesterday was longer again to me; every
day that comes is long to me.

That is not the way I used to be, without fighting, without battles,
without learning feats, without young girls, without music, without
harps, without bruising bones, without great deeds; without increase
of learning, without generosity, without drinking at feasts, without
courting, without hunting, the two trades I was used to; without going
out to battle. Ochone! the want of them is sorrowful to me.

No hunting of deer or stag, it is not like that I would wish to be;
no leashes for our hounds, no hounds; it is long the clouds are over
me to-night!

Without rising up to do bravery as we were used, without playing as
we had a mind; without swimming of our fighting men in the lake; it
is long the clouds are over me to-night!

There is no one at all in the world the way I am; it is a pity the
way I am; an old man dragging stones.    It is long the clouds are
over me to-night!

I am the last of the Fenians, great Oisin, son of Finn, listening to
the voice of bells; it is long the clouds are over me to-night!




_The Foretelling of Cathbad the Druid at Deirdre's Birth_


Let Deirdre be her name: harm will come through her. She will be fair,
comely, bright-haired: heroes will fight for her, and kings go seeking
for her.

O Deirdre, on whose account many shall weep, on whose account many
women shall be envious, there will be trouble on Ulster for your sake,
O fair daughter of Fedlimid.

Many will be jealous of your face, O flame of beauty; for your sake
heroes shall go to exile. For your sake deeds of anger shall be done
in Emain; there is harm in your face, for it will bring banishment
and death on the sons of kings.

In your fate, O beautiful child, are wounds and ill-doings and shedding
of blood. You will have a little grave apart to yourself; you will
be a tale of wonder for ever, Deirdre.




_Deirdre's Lament for the Sons of Usnach_


As for Deirdre, she cried pitifully, wearily, and tore her fair hair,
and she was talking of the sons of Usnach, and of Alban, and it is
what she said:

A blessing eastward to Alban from me; good is the sight of her bays
and valleys, pleasant was it to sit on the slopes of her hills, where
the sons of Usnach used to be hunting.

One day, when the nobles of Alban were drinking with the sons of
Usnach, Naoise gave a kiss secretly to the daughter of the lord of
Duntreon. He sent her a frightened deer, wild, and a fawn at its foot;
and he went to visit her coming home from the troops of Inverness.

When myself heard that, my head filled full of jealousy; I put my boat
on the waves, it was the same to me to live or to die. They followed
me swimming, Ainnle and Ardan, that never said a lie; they turned me
back again, two that would give battle to a hundred. Naoise gave me
his true word, he swore three times with his arms as witness, he would
never put vexation on me again, until he would go from me to the armies
of the dead.

Och! if she knew to-night, Naoise to be under a covering of clay, it
is she would cry her fill, and it is I would cry along with her!

After that Deirdre lay down by the grave, and they were digging earth
from it, and she made this lament after the sons of Usnach:

Long is the day without the sons of Usnach; it was never wearisome
to be in their company; sons of a king that entertained exiles; three
lions of the Hill of the Cave.

Three darlings of the women of Britain; three hawks of Slieve Cuilenn;
sons of a king served by valour, to whom warriors did obedience.

Three heroes not good at homage; their fall is a cause of sorrow; three
sons of the sister of a king; three props of the army of Cuailgne.

The High King of Ulster, my first betrothed, I forsook for love of
Naoise; short my life will be after him; I will make keening at their
burial.

That I would live after Naoise let no one think on the earth; I will
not go on living after Ainnle and after Ardan.

After them I myself will not live; three that would leap through the
midst of battle; since my beloved is gone from me I will cry my fill
over his grave.

O, young man, digging the new grave, do not make the grave narrow;
I will be along with them in the grave, making lamentations and ochones!

Many the hardship I met with along with the three heroes; I suffered
want of home, want of fire, it is myself that used not to be troubled.

Their three shields and their spears made a bed for me often. O, young
man, put their three swords close over their grave!

Their three hounds, their three hawks, will be from this time without
huntsmen; three aids of every battle; three pupils of Conall Cearnach.

The three leashes of those three hounds have brought a sigh from my
heart: it is I had the care of them, the sight of them is a cause of
grief.

I was never one day alone to the day of the making of this grave,
though it is often that myself and yourselves were in loneliness.

My sight is gone from me with looking at the grave of Naoise; it is
short till my life will leave me, and those who would have keened me
do not live.

Since it is through me they were betrayed I will be tired out with
sorrow; it is a pity I was not in the earth before the sons of Usnach
were killed.

Sorrowful was my journey with Fergus, betraying me to the Red Branch;
we were deceived all together with his sweet, flowery words. I left
the delights of Ulster for the three heroes that were bravest; my life
will not be long, I myself am alone after them.

I am Deirdre without gladness, and I at the end of my life; since it
is grief to be without them, I myself will not be long after them!




_Emer's Lament for Cuchulain_


And Emer took the head of Cuchulain in her hands, and she washed it
clean, and put a silk cloth about it, and she held it to her breast,
and she began to cry heavily over it, and she made this complaint:

Och, head! Ochone, O head! you gave death to great heroes, to many
hundreds; my head will lie in the same grave, the one stone will be
made for both of us.

Och, hand! Ochone, hand, that was once gentle. It is often it was put
under my head; it is dear that hand was to me.

Dear mouth! Ochone, kind mouth that was sweet-voiced telling stories;
since the time love first came on your face, you never refused either
weak or strong.

Dear the man, dear the man, that would kill the whole of a great army;
dear his cold bright hair, and dear his bright cheeks!

Dear the king, dear the king, that never gave a refusal to any; thirty
days it is to-night since my body lay beside your body.

Och, two spears! Ochone, two spears! Och, shield! Och, deadly sword!
Let them be given, to Conall of the battles; there was never any wage
given the like of that.

I am glad, I am glad, Cuchulain of Muirthemne, I never brought red
shame on your face, for any unfaithfulness against you.

Happy are they, happy are they, who will never hear the cuckoo again
for ever, now that the Hound has died from us.

I am carried away like a branch on the stream; I will not bind up my
hair to-day. From this day I have nothing to say that is better than
Ochone! "And oh! my love," she said, "we were often in one another's
company, and it was happy for us; for if the world had been searched
from the rising of the sun to sunset, the like would never have been
found in one place, of the Black Sainglain and the Grey of Macha, and
Laeg the chariot-driver, and myself and Cuchulain. And it is breaking
my heart is in my body, to be listening to the pity and the sorrowing
of women and men, and the harsh crying of the young men of Ulster
keening Cuchulain." And after that Emer bade Conall to make a wide,
very deep grave for Cuchulain; and she laid herself down beside her
gentle comrade, and she put her mouth to his mouth, and she said: "Love
of my life, my friend, my sweetheart, my one choice of the men of the
earth, many is the woman, wed or unwed, envied me till to-day; and
now I will not stay living after you."




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE KILTARTAN POETRY BOOK ***

This file should be named tkpbo10.txt or tkpbo10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, tkpbo11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, tkpbo10a.txt

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

